1.5. Early warning system for flood risk  1.5.1. Intended outcome as an adaptation to climate change 1.5.2. Adaptation measures 1.5.3. Co-benefit of reducing exposure to floodwater   Floods can have major negative impacts on communities globally. To increase preparedness for such events and lessen their effects, multiple methods of mitigation have been developed – Flood Forecasting and Early Warning Systems (FFEWS) are one of these. Flood forecasting systems are designed to assess flood risk, while Early Warning Systems (EWS) aim to inform people ahead of time of a flood, allowing them to take responsive measures to prepare and reduce the flood’s impact. Flood forecasting systems use hydro-meteorological data to model weather and flood events, aiming to determine the probability of exceeding established warning thresholds, while EWS  primarily encompass flood risk assessments, local hazard monitoring, and the dissemination and communication of flood-related information. EWS can range from basic and traditional to highly technical and modern (such as local bell ringing and automated scientific system alerts).  In Europe, forecasting and early warning systems are not considered foolproof, and instead require continuous updates to incorporate state-of-the-art scientific and operational knowledge. EWS are vulnerable to systemic failures and errors, which can place communities at serious risk. Therefore, regular updating and effective management of these systems are essential to strengthen flood preparedness.   Ultimately, the effectiveness of flood forecasting and early warning systems is understood to be critically linked with response capability: the ability of national, local and community institutions to understand, interpret, disseminate and respond to flood warnings. 
   1.5.1. Intended outcome as an adaptation to climate change  Flood management and early warning systems have already prevented many flood losses across Europe, but flood disasters still occur, and with climate change, the risk of floods is increasing. Climate data indicate that heavy precipitation is becoming more frequent in Europe, particularly in northern regions and the Alpine areas. There are also increasing trends of river flooding in western and central Europe, while accelerated sea-level rise in coastal areas is heightening the risk of coastal floods and storm surges. Northern and western-central European cities are expected to a experience a significant increase in both pluvial and fluvial floods, whereas southern European cities, more prone to increasing drought, are becoming increasingly vulnerable to sudden, intense precipitation events occurring during dry periods.  Consequently, proactive flood adaptation and flood risk management, including FFEWS, are considered crucial to contain the growth in flood risks associated with climate change.   In this context, the 2007 European Flood Directive requires member states to establish flood risk management plans that incorporate flood forecasting and early warning systems, tailored to the specific hydrological characteristics of local contexts, such as individual river basins or sub-basins. This involves a comprehensive assessment of all areas at risk of significant flooding, including mapping flood extents and identifying the assets and populations at risk. Additionally, the European Commission’s Disaster Resilience Goals, adopted in 2023, focus on improving early warning systems, as outlined in Disaster Resilience Goal 3: Alert. 
 1.5.2. Adaptation measures  - European Flood Awareness System (EFAS) This system was developed to produce European overviews on ongoing and forecasted floods, more than 3 days and up to 10 days in advance. The EFAS platform offers real time forecasting for EFAS partners, and mapping and training tools also for the public. These mapping tools include flood inundation scenarios, flood protection levels, and landslide vulnerability, among other inputs. - Bell ringing  - Flood sirens  - Mass social media  - Short Message Service (SMS) - Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS) - Flood warning road signs   - River gauges: These can provide real-time data on river water levels.  
1.5.3. Co-benefit of reducing exposure to floodwater  Effective flood forecasting and early warning systems are fundamental to enabling timely, comprehensive response measures that can reduce their impact. These response measures include both technical and practical actions. Technical measures, such as activating flood preparedness plans at wastewater treatment plants to help prepare for sudden and intense stormwater surges, can prevent sewer overflows and limit the uncontrolled release of floodwater. At the household level, technical measures like installing backflow valves or plugs can prevent floodwaters from entering through drains and toilets (See 1.6.2. Flood Protection - Adaptation Measures). 
 FFEWS also enable practical actions, such as the implementation of flood evacuation plans and the activation of emergency shelters, which allow individuals and communities to relocate from high-risk flood areas and protect their homes from flooding. By enabling both technical and practical flood preparation and response measures, FFEWS help minimise contact with contaminated floodwater.  Floodwaters are often contaminated, containing pathogens from sources such as surface run-off, sewer overflows, and even animal waste. These pathogens raise the risk of outbreaks of waterborne diseases through direct or indirect contact with contaminated water following flood events. Accordingly, FFEWS that help minimise contact with floodwater, prevent sewer overflows, and limit the release and spread of floodwater equally serve to reduce human exposure to infectious pathogens, thereby lowering the risk of waterborne disease transmission.    Floodwaters can also elevate the risk of vector-borne diseases; areas of standing or stagnant water create ideal breeding conditions for mosquitoes, thus increasing the risk of mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria, dengue fever, and West Nile virus. By reducing exposure to floodwater, FFEWS can help limit the formation of these habitats, thus reducing the risk of mosquito-borne infections, in addition to waterborne diseases. Effective forecasting and early warning systems can also enable targeted preparedness for infectious disease hazards triggered by flooding, such as by directly communicating precautionary measures for safe post-flood drinking water.

References
1. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1464343X23003072
2. https://egusphere.copernicus.org/preprints/2025/egusphere-2025-828/egusphere-2025-828.pdf; Alfieri, L., et. al. 2019. Range-dependent thresholds for global flood early warning, Journal of Hydrology, 4, 100034.
3. https://www.ctc-n.org/sites/default/files/resources/early_warning_systems_for_floods_0.pdf
4. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1464343X23003072
5. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 228. Available at: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2800/8671471
6. Cunge, J. and Erlich, M., 2014, ′What has changed in France in coastal flood risk management after Xynthia storm′, Annals of Warsaw University of Life Sciences, Land Reclamation 46(3), pp. 181—196; Fekete, A. and Sandholz, S., 2021, ′Here Comes the Flood, but Not Failure? Lessons to Learn after the Heavy Rain and Pluvial Floods in Germany 2021′, Water 13(21), p. 3016; Apel, H., et al., 2022, ′Brief communication: Impact forecasting could substantially improve the emergency management of deadly floods: case study July 2021 floods in Germany′, Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences 22(9), pp. 3005—3014.
7. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1464343X23003072
8. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 228.; Feyen, L., et al., 2020, Climate change impacts and adaptation in Europe, JRC Publications Repository.
9. Bednar-Friedl, B., et al., 2022, ′Chapter 13′, in: Pörtner, H. O. et al. (eds), Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1817—1927.
10. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 226.
11. European Environment Agency, 2023. Urban adaptation in Europe: how cities and towns respond to climate change, EEA Report No 12/2020, European Environment Agency.; European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 125.
12. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 125.
13. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 224.
14. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/dir/2007/60/oj/eng
15. https://civil-protection-humanitarian-aid.ec.europa.eu/what/civil-protection/european-disaster-risk-management/european-disaster-resilience-goals_en ; https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/api/files/document/print/en/qanda_23_600/QANDA_23_600_EN.pdf
16. https://www.copernicus.eu/en/european-flood-awareness-system
17. https://european-flood.emergency.copernicus.eu/efas_frontend/#/home
18. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 9, 109, 115.
19. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 110.
20. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union.
21. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 38-39; Weilnhammer, V., et al., 2021, 'Extreme weather events in Europe and their health consequences — A systematic review', International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 233.
22. Kibret, S., 2018, ‘Time to revisit how dams are affecting malaria transmission’, The LancetPlanetary Health 2(9), p. e378-e379.
23. Weilnhammer, V., et al., 2021, 'Extreme weather events in Europe and their health consequences — A systematic review', International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 233.
24. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666592125000071; https://drmkc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/Portals/0/innovation/SupportSystem/11_Lithuania/JRC_PublicWarningonNaturalHazard_05_PWS_final.pdf
