Pathway 3.5: Promoting plant-based diets
 
3.5.1 Intended outcomes of plant-based diets as mitigation to climate change

Food system emissions account for a third of total anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, with the largest contributions coming from agriculture and land use, while supply chain activities including transport, retail, packaging and waste management also play a role. Animal agriculture is a major contributor, accounting for 56 to 58% of total food-related emissions and an estimated 12-17% of total GHG emissions globally. Large ruminants like cattle and their supply chain are responsible for a large share of emissions, mainly due to methane emissions from rumen fermentation. With meat demand rising globally and an ongoing trend towards agricultural expansion and intensifications, emissions are projected to further increase. The demand for animal-sourced protein is projected to increase globally, but this increased demand cannot be met sustainably without fundamental transformations in the food system towards more sustainable alternatives. Europe has one of the highest animal-sourced food consumptions in the world and Western countries rank as the largest meat consumers historically, being responsible for 38% of cumulative global meat consumption from 1961 to 2019, while only accounting for 14% of the global population.  

In recent years, the transition towards a more plant-based food system has received increasing attention as a possible solution to slow down the rising GHG emissions from the food system. The term plant-based diet (PBD) describes dietary patterns that are mainly based on foods derived from plants while excluding or limiting the consumption of animal products. Plant-based foods have a significantly lower environmental impact compared to animal-based foods. 
 
The relationship between meat consumption and environmental impact has been well established.,, Ruminants like cattle and sheep have a particularly high contribution to GHG emissions because they produce the GHG methane through fermentation processes in their rumen. Animal agriculture further exacerbates climate change through the clearing of forests and grasslands for grazing. Forests and other wildlands act as carbon sinks by absorbing CO₂ from the atmosphere and sequestering it in biomass and soils. The higher environmental impact of animal-based diets compared to plant-based ones is also a result of the inefficiency of using crops for animal feed rather than directly for human consumption. More than 80% of the farmland globally is used for animal agriculture, which only provides 18% of total calories. The majority of cereals and soy produced is used as feed for animals, whereas if they were directly consumed by humans, fewer resources would be required. 

PBDs help mitigate climate change by reducing GHG emissions from the food system as they generally have a lower environmental impact than diets high in animal-sourced foods. In one study, the dietary impact of vegans compared to high meat eaters in terms of GHG emissions was 75% lower. Reductions in animal-based food have been found to proportionally reduce the environmental footprint of diets. A review of 52 life cycle assessment studies found that the carbon footprint of the most emission intense protein sources (beef, mutton and lamb) was up to 100 larger than the more climate friendly ones (vegetal sources like pulses). While pork, chicken, and seafood produce less GHG emissions than beef, even the lowest animal-based products have higher emissions than plant-based proteins. Studies show that it would be possible to feed more than 9 billion people in 2050 without additional land used for farming by reducing livestock products together with other changes to the food system such as changed wastage patterns and an expansion of organic agriculture.,

3.5.2 Mitigation measures 

Strategies to promote plant-based diets and reduce livestock production can take various forms and happen at different political levels. They can be incorporated into policy initiatives at the municipal, regional, national and international levels complementing efforts in nutrition, sustainability, environmental protection, and health. Effective strategies often address both the demand side and the supply side.

Informational measures

	•	Information campaigns generally enjoy wide public support and can also be effective in increasing the acceptance of subsequent stricter measures. Many European countries are already running national campaigns to encourage fruit and vegetable consumption, often as part of a wider programme on dietary education. Appeals related to animal welfare have also shown potential to be effective in reducing meat consumption. 
	•	Labelling of food such as CO2 labels that inform consumers about the environmental impact of products have been found to receive high public support and encourage people to pay attention to emissions of products when shopping. However, the evidence on impacting actual consumer choices has been mixed. 
	•	Dietary guidelines and nutrition standards can recommend a higher consumption of plant-based foods as a strategy to improve the health of the population while also addressing climate change, based on the most recent scientific findings. One example is the Planetary Health Diet developed by the EAT-Lancet Commission, which suggests a diet that is healthy for both people and the planet and emphasizes a focus on plant-based foods. At the EU level, the Green Public Procurement (GPP) guidelines offer voluntary criteria and encourage the inclusion of plant-based foods in public catering services, suggesting two plant-based days per week in addition to emphasising vegetarian dishes. Although national dietary guidelines may have little direct impact on consumers’ food choices, they can be effective in shaping institutional practices such as in schools and hospitals. 
	•	Dietary education can play an important role especially in schools and day centres. Some countries like Finland already teach cooking and nutrition at school.

Behavioural measures

	•	Nudging is aimed at influencing consumer choices by modifying the decision context or environment. Measures targeting habitual behaviors can help to reduce meat consumption. Nudging can shape food environments and promote plant-based foods in spaces such as supermarkets, cafeterias, and hospitals. Examples include targeted placements of plant-based options, altering food options such as the expansions of plant-based dishes in cafeterias, reducing the portion sizes of meat servings, and presenting plant-based dishes as standard options. Many European cities are already employing nudges. When nudging is not implemented top down but developed together with the communities in a participatory approach, measures are usually even more effective. Behavioural measures in public catering settings such as adding more plant-based options and presenting them as default has been found to be highly effective in reducing meat consumption. 

Regulatory measures 

	•	Advertising bans on products that are harmful for the environment such as meat can play a role in reducing demand for animal-based products. Some European countries prohibit advertisements of unhealthy foods to children, although specific bans on meat or animal-based products are rare. One example is the city of Haarlem in the Netherlands which bans advertising products that are harmful for the environment, including meat from factory farms.
  
Fiscal measures 

	•	Financial incentives are often the most effective measures in reducing meat consumption and production. This includes shifts in agricultural subsidies and taxation policies as well as investments and grants to promote plant-based foods. For example, removal of subsidies from animal-sourced foods and taxation of such foods to reflect externalized costs of animal agriculture will help reshape markets to make it less profitable to engage in practices such as factory farming. Examples from European countries include proposed measures such as an animal welfare levy in Germany, a meat tax in the Netherlands, and CO2 taxes. When implementing financial policies, it should be ensured that they are socially just and do not disproportionally burden low-income households. In the UK, for instance, bonus programmes promote the consumption of fruits and vegetables in low income households by providing them with credits or vouchers to be used for healthy products.

Decision-makers may be hesitant to implement policies such as taxes due to a fear of low support and public backlash. Public attitudes and acceptability of interventions are complex. In general, interventions that are seen as less intrusive, such as labelling or education campaigns, receive the most support. Interventions such as higher animal standards and advertising bans are also widely accepted. The interventions that have the most potential, however, are fiscal measures such as taxes on meat products, and these receive lower support. Subsidies on alternatives to animal products is another financial measure with potential and generally receives more support than taxes. Informational measures alone might have little impact on consumer choices, however, when coupled with behavioural interventions or fiscal measures they might be more effective. Indeed, combining different measures might be the best strategy, making use of synergies between different instruments. For example, informational and behavioural measures might increase public support for fiscal measures as the awareness of the risks and consequences of meat consumption increases in society. 
Changing diets can be difficult as meat consumption is not only linked to nutrition but also to traditions, cultural norms, and identities. Furthermore, the capacity to implement changes in one’s diet differs and is affected for example by material resources. For this reason, promoting PBDs might be most effective when policies are well-coordinated, context-sensitive, and tailored to address both social and economic constraints, combining instruments that influence both the demand and supply sides.

Examples of mitigation measures

At the national level, Denmark is the first country that has introduced an action plan for the transition towards plant-based foods. In 2023, the Danish Action Plan for Plant-based Foods was introduced with the aim to strengthen the Danish plant-based food sector. Based on the recommendations that plant-based foods can play an important role in counteracting climate change, Denmark plans on contributing to a global transition towards more sustainable food systems. The strategy involves measures on both the supply and demand side. Proposed initiatives include a focus on PBDs in schools and public canteens, education and skill training, dietary guidelines, as well as strengthening research and innovation through public-private partnerships, and subsidies to strengthen plant-based produce.

Cities and municipalities are important players in the promotion of a PBD. They are not only responsible for public institutions, such as schools and daycare centres that provide food for children and young people, but can also take on a pioneering role and serve as role models, as illustrated by the following examples

The city of Groningen in the Netherlands has a food strategy with the goal of supporting residents to make healthier choices and promoting sustainable production. As part of its Food Trails journey, several local initiatives are supported. The city also published a cookbook to promote knowledge and skills around plant-based eating, together with offering community cooking classes. 

The Swedish city of Malmö has implemented a policy on sustainable development and food since 2010. The main aim is to serve healthy and climate friendly meals. It has substantially reduced the GHG emissions from food procurement; in schools for example, meat is served only once or twice a week. An important part of the strategy are education and training programmes to raise awareness on the links between food and climate change.

Edible Cities Network is a global network funded by the EU that connects cities globally to make them more liveable, green and socially resilient, focusing on local food system sustainability to increase food security, improve health and nutrition, improve biodiversity and minimise the environmental impact. Local residents have increased access to healthy and fresh food, for example through community gardens. This can improve access to sustainable and plant-based foods. 

 
3.5.3 Co-benefits for infectious disease

Promoting PBDs and reducing the production of animal-based foods has important direct and indirect consequences for infectious disease outcomes in humans. The risk of infectious disease outbreaks is increased through meat production, both from direct contact with livestock and wildlife and indirectly through environmental impacts including biodiversity loss and climate change. This is especially relevant as almost two-thirds (58%) of all known human pathogens are zoonotic and 73% of emerging and reemerging pathogens (newly emerging pathogens and those that have recently increased in incidence or geographic spread) are known to be zoonotic. 

3.5.3.1 Reduced animal protein consumption 

Lowering the demand for animal-sourced foods is one of the most direct pathways through which climate mitigation can reduce infectious disease risk. Agriculture plays a key role in infectious diseases, with more than 50% of zoonotic and 25% of all infectious diseases that emerged in humans since 1940 being associated with agricultural drivers. Intensive livestock production increases the probability of zoonotic disease spillovers where a pathogen (bacterial, viral or parasitic) is transmitted from a vertebrate animal to humans. By reducing the consumption of meat and animal products, especially from industrial sources, plant-based diets can significantly decrease the zoonotic disease risk. Promoting plant-based diets has therefore important co-benefits for infectious disease outcomes.

The probability of zoonotic spillovers depend on several factors including the disease dynamics in the reservoir host, exposure to pathogens and within-human factors that determine susceptibility to infections. The pathway to spillovers goes through several phases. First, it is dependent on pathogen pressure (pathogen load to which the recipient host is exposed), which is determined by reservoir host distribution and density, and the prevalence and intensity of infections. There are three different routes by which pathogens are released from hosts and transmitted to humans: either through excretion, slaughter or via arthropod vectors. Pathogen exposure is then influenced by human behaviour (direct  contact with infected animals, butchering, preparing and eating meat) or vector behaviour (biting rate). Lastly, the probability and severity of infection in humans is affected by genetic, physiological and immunological factors.

In Europe, the first and second most reported zoonoses in humans are campylobacteriosis and salmonellosis.
	•	Campylobacteriosis (Campylobacter spp.) is the leading cause of bacterial gastroenteritis in the EU, mainly linked to consumption of undercooked poultry, contaminated meat, or raw milk. There were 148,181 confirmed cases of human campylobacteriosis in the EU in 2023.
	•	Salmonellosis (Salmonella spp.) is a major cause of foodborne illness, commonly associated with eggs, egg products, poultry, pork. In the EU, there were 77,486 confirmed cases of human salmonellosis in 2023.
	•	Escherichia coli (Shiga Toxin-producing Escherichia Coli (STEC)) is the third most commonly reported gastrointestinal food-borne illness in the EU. In 2023 there were 10,217 confirmed cases of human STEC infections in the EU.
	•	Brucellosis (Brucella spp.) is persistent in parts of Southern/Balkan Europe, transmitted via unpasteurised dairy and contact with livestock. There were 259 confirmed cases in humans in the EU in 2023. Transmission mainly happens through the consumption of unpasteurised milk and dairy products as well as undercooked contaminated meat and the direct contact with infected animals, including through farmers, livestock breeders, butchers, slaughterhouse workers and veterinarians.

Zoonotic spillovers can happen both from livestock and from wild animals. Direct transmission from wildlife to humans is relatively rare compared to transmission from domestic animals. Domestic animals can act as intermediate or amplifier hosts between wildlife and humans, and intensive livestock production increases the risk of zoonotic spillovers. The current affordability and high availability of meat only became possible through transformations in livestock production towards highly industrialized and intensive husbandry. The change of animal agriculture from more small-scale methods to industrial-scale production has increased the movement of pathogens between and within industrial facilities, the release to the external environment and exposure to humans. In industrialized animal production, highly concentrated large numbers of the same breed are raised in confined spaces. This increases the pathogen pressure and increases the risk of exposure for example for farm workers and other people coming into contact with these operations. Intensive animal husbandry involves many people at different stages of the production including veterinarians, slaughterhouse workers, and transportation workers, and through ventilation and animal waste, neighbouring areas of the facility can also be exposed to pathogens.

Species with larger populations and wider distribution tend to host more zoonotic viruses.  This suggests a greater transmission potential from livestock species that are high in abundance and live in close proximity with humans. The conditions of intensive animal farming increase the risk for the emergence and amplification of epidemics. In intensive animal farming, the high physical and genetic proximity has several consequences for infectious diseases. The high level of genetic similarity in intensive animal farming creates conditions where newly emerging pathogens spread more rapidly and the probability of catastrophic epidemics is increased. For example, higher density increases the risk of E. coli O157:H7 transmission among cattle. Together with the high physical proximity, pathogens are also more likely to evolve and mutate, increasing the risk of a mutation becoming transmissible to humans. Intensive animal husbandry also has the risk of contaminating nearby animals with pathogens through the ventilation systems and via animal waste, which increases the risk of the pathogen spreading further. The outbreak of the Nipah epidemic in Malaysia in 1998 for example was facilitated by the conditions created by intensive pig farms. The virus first spilled over from fruit bats to pigs, quickly spread within pig populations and was then transmitted to humans that came into contact with infected pigs.

3.5.3.2 Healthy ecosystems

An additional driver of infectious disease risk from animal agriculture is the associated land use change. Changes in land use is indeed the main driver of the emergence and reemergence of human pathogens. Land use-induced spillovers happen when the transmission of pathogens from wild animals to humans is driven by land use change.  The main driver of natural habitat loss globally is livestock production, with the majority of land used for agricultural production being used for grazing or feedstock production. In fact agricultural land accounts for almost half (44%) of global habitable land, and 80% of land used for agriculture is used for livestock. Animal agriculture is a major cause of land use change such as deforestation as animal products require more energy inputs than plant based ones. Agricultural intensification and land use change are associated with higher risks for the emergence of zoonotic diseases as it promotes encroachment into wildlife habitats, leading to increased interaction between wildlife, livestock and humans, which gives rise to the spillover of new pathogens to livestock and humans and the establishment of new transmission cycles. Thus, a reduction in animal agriculture reduces the need for agricultural land. The promotion of PBDs can therefore reduce the pressure on wildlife habitats. Limiting human encroachment into natural habitats by promoting a shift towards diets lower in animal-based foods can have co-benefits for limiting wildlife-origin zoonotic diseases. 

Land use change is a mediator for infectious disease transmission through factors including shifts in the ecological niches, hosts, and pathogens; changes in the makeup of host and vector communities; changes in the behaviour or movement patterns of vectors and hosts; altered geographic distribution of hosts and vectors. The interfaces between wildlife and livestock are dynamic and bidirectional and pathogens are spread mostly through indirect contact such as through the use of a shared environment, shared resources such as pasture or water, and through vectors. Human induced shifts and land use change, for example deforestation and encroachment into habitats, creates new interfaces for wildlife and domestic species through shared ecologies. Introducing livestock to converted land creates opportunities for additional pathways to zoonotic spillover. Deforestation caused by agricultural expansion has led to the emergence of zoonotic infectious diseases as habitat disruption alters ecological balances and brings humans and livestock into contact with wildlife reservoirs of novel pathogens. In general, large and intact habitats have better wildlife health and can minimize contact between humans and wildlife and host species that do not normally interact. Higher density of hosts increases the incidence of infectious diseases through higher contact and transmission rates among hosts. The more land is used for livestock grazing, the higher are contact rates between human–livestock, human–wild animal and livestock–wild animal. This increases the probability of spillover events. This is particularly important because zoonotic pathogens cause the majority of recent emerging infectious diseases. Decreasing livestock production helps prevent land-use change, particularly deforestation for grazing and feed production, and thus can help reduce the risk for zoonotic spillovers. 

In addition to  increasing the contact rates between wildlife-livestock-humans, the expansion of agriculture into natural habitats can also cause biodiversity loss. The loss of biodiversity also affects infectious disease dynamics. A decrease in landscape diversity increases the competition for limited resources, pushing animals into human modified landscapes and increasing contact rates. Furthermore, biodiversity loss also means the loss of larger and medium-sized herbivores and predators, which can lead to a greater abundance of species that are common reservoir hosts for zoonotic pathogens like rodents, bats, and birds. This is known as the dilution effect, where biodiversity loss leads to a higher disease risk. Land use change from undisturbed habitats to human use leads to an increase in wildlife hosts of known human pathogens and a decrease in all other species. The loss of predators reduces the regulation of reservoir hosts and vector populations and an increase in host abundance can increase the risk for zoonotic spillover events. 

Intact ecosystems have a higher species diversity and higher landscape immunity compared to ecosystems affected by land use change as they are able to maintain immune function of wild animals and prevent conditions of high prevalence of pathogens. Landscape immunity and the proximity between wildlife and humans play an important role for land use-induced spillovers. Thus, restoring biodiversity, reforestation and land restoration have infectious disease-related co-benefits. Intact ecosystems can act as buffers that dilute pathogen transmission by maintaining diverse species communities. Restoring forests and wetlands can also regulate vector populations and water quality, further lowering infectious disease burdens. Reducing the consumption of meat can help preserve biodiversity and reduce land and water usage. By reducing the demand for pasture and feed crops, climate mitigation strategies aimed at dietary change can therefore help conserve biodiversity, and thereby reduce the ecological disruptions that lead to infectious disease outbreaks. 

Livestock production has major impacts on both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems through nutrient enrichment and land use. Intensive livestock production leads to surplus nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P) inputs on farms and alters biogeochemical cycles of N and P. Particularly nitrogen (N) plays a crucial role in environmental impacts because when deposited into soil or water, it contributes directly to the acidification of ecosystems, damaging vegetation and soil chemistry, contributing to ecological imbalance. The surplus N is mainly lost to the environment for example through leaching to groundwater and runoff to surface waters. Surplus N from manure, fertilizers, and feed production contribute to soil acidification, reducing biodiversity and ecological resilience. Surplus P is lost by runoff to waterways, driving freshwater eutrophication, causing algal blooms, oxygen depletion, and reduced aquatic biodiversity., It also leads to land degradation, soil erosion and nutrient depletion among pastures and rangelands. About two thirds of all global biomass harvested yearly for human activity is used in the livestock sector. In Europe, the livestock sector is the main contributor of environmental change associated with agriculture, accounting for 78% terrestrial biodiversity loss, 80% for soil acidification, and 73% for water pollution. Intensively managed grasslands and arable land for growing livestock feed have low biodiversity. Through manure applications and mineral fertilizers for feedstock production, the livestock sector in Europe is estimated to contribute 47% of the nitrogen river load to coastal waters and 26% of the phosphorus river load. Animal manure can have indirect effects on human health through the emergence of new pathogens and direct effects through the risk of contamination of water and food supplies. Plant-based diets have lower acidification and eutrophication rates compared to meat-based diets. Thus, a shift towards plant-based diets can help protect healthy ecosystems with important co-benefits for infectious diseases. 


3.5.3.3 Reduced antibiotic use 

The overuse of antibiotics in industrial animal farming contributes substantially to the emergence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) (see also pathway 3.1: sustainable farming strategies). In Europe, antimicrobial-resistant infections are estimated to cause over 35000 deaths annually, posing a challenge for public health. Industrial meat production is one of the main causes of antimicrobial resistance in humans. High density, industrialized livestock are vulnerable to the spread of diseases often resulting in the losses of animals. In order to prevent such damaging losses, high doses of antibiotics are given to livestock. This has important consequences for infectious diseases in humans. Many of these drugs are also often used in human medicine and the widespread use in livestock is driving microbial resistance to these drugs. Most human infections with antibiotic-resistant Salmonella, Campylobacter and Escherichia coli strains have their source in the livestock supply chain. Antibiotics are also often given without known disease for subtherapeutic purposes because they promote growth and enhance feed efficiency. In the EU, a regulation was introduced in 2022 with the aim to fight AMR, under which the preventative use of antibiotics in groups of animals is strictly limited.

The waste runoff from animals that have received antibiotics create wastewater lagoons with conditions where resistant bacteria are more likely to develop through horizontal gene transfer. This can increase the risk for drug-resistant pathogens being transmitted to humans. Reducing meat consumption and supporting diversified farming systems can lower the selective pressures that drive AMR, thus safeguarding the effectiveness of antibiotics. Therefore, a shift towards PBDs has co-benefits for AMR, reducing human vulnerability to infectious diseases.

3.5.3.4 Human health benefits 
 
In addition to the environmental benefits PBDs may provide benefits to human health. There is evidence that following a PBD improves health such as through improving immunity, and reducing the risk of heart disease and diabetes.,, Plant-based diets usually contain higher amounts of antioxidants such as vitamins C and E, dietary fiber, macro-, and micronutrients, which has been shown to improve immune response and lower the risk of viral infections. Nutrition is an important determinant in human vulnerability to infectious diseases and improved nutrition can help in combating infectious diseases. Research has shown lower chronic disease risk associated with PBDs compared to omnivores. Processed meat is linked to various health risks. For example, red and processed meat consumption is linked to a higher risk for obesity. The majority of Europeans eat up to seven times the amount recommended. The implementation of PBDs have been suggested as a strategy to prevent chronic diseases, especially due to their association with lower risk for cardio-vascular diseases and hypertension. Chronic diseases can make people more vulnerable to infectious diseases, by altering the susceptibility and manifestations of infections. PBDs have thus been proposed as a dual strategy to mitigate climate change and improve health especially for infectious diseases. 

While PBDs are generally associated with better health outcomes due to improved nutrition and lower chronic disease risk, it is important to note that whether PBDs are healthier compared to other diets depends on their specific composition. For example, the consumption of unprocessed plant foods such as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, legumes, seeds and nuts is healthier than the consumption of ultra-processed plant foods like refined grains, and sweets. PBDs with less healthy foods and higher amounts of refined grains, and high in added sugar can for example increase the risk for cardiovascular disease. If people switch to PBDs without being aware of the importance of including healthy foods, they could have worse nutritional outcomes. Poor nutrition can limit the effectiveness of an immune response against infections and make humans more susceptible to infectious diseases. For the promotion of PBDs to have beneficial effects on health, it is therefore important to ensure the inclusion of healthy foods such as whole grains, fruits, vegetables, nuts and legumes. 

Different socio-economic groups differ in their dietary behaviour. In Europe, higher income and lower educational attainment are associated with higher consumption of processed meat. Positive attitudes toward nutrition is an important mediator, being associated with lower consumption of processed meat. This suggests that interventions aimed at attitudes towards healthy food could have potential to shift dietary patterns to less processed meat consumption. Reducing the consumption of meat could therefore help target health inequalities while mitigating climate change.

However, certain policies, in particular fiscal policies, might have distributional impacts. One of the concerns of interventions such as meat taxes is the potential disproportional burden on low-income households. In fact, uncompensated meat taxes are slightly regressive,  which could widen health inequalities further. This can potentially affect infectious disease outcomes of households as poor health is associated with higher vulnerability to infectious diseases. This can be avoided if policies are designed to compensate for this effect, for example through revenue recycling via lump-sum transfers.  
3.5.3.5 Climate change

Indirect pathways also include the slow down of climate change in the long-term because changes in temperature and precipitation as well as climate extreme events have important consequences on the dynamics of infectious diseases (see general impacts).


