4.1. Increasing green and blue spaces  4.1.1. Intended outcome as an adaptation to climate change  4.1.2. Adaptation measures 4.1.3. Co-benefit of reduced exposure to floodwater
4.1.4. Co-benefit of heat management 
4.1.5. Co-benefit of improved indoor & outdoor air quality 
4.1.6. Co-benefit of enhanced mental health & physical activity  4.1.7. Co-benefit of healthy ecosystems 4.1.8. Co-benefit of safe and clean water resources
4.1.9. Trade-off of creating habitat for disease pathogens & vectors
4.1.10. Trade-off of allergies & respiratory issues 
 N.B. Added pathways  4.1. Increasing green and blue spaces    4.1.1. Intended outcome as an adaptation to climate change   Green and blue spaces encompass a wide array of natural and semi-natural elements and landscapes, ranging from forests, wetlands, rivers, and coastlines, to farmland, parks, gardens, playing fields, allotments, cemeteries and roadside verges, and individual green features, such as street trees, green roofs and walls, footpaths, and blue elements, including sustainable drainage systems (such as detention ponds and raingardens), and waterbodies of various sizes, including ponds, streams, ornamental fountains, and drinking water points. 
 Green and blue spaces are increasingly recognised for their role in bolstering climate adaptation and mitigation efforts – this is because blue and green spaces can help regulate the climate and provide critical environmental functions, capable of reducing the negative impacts of climate change and associated hazards, such as such as heatwaves, flooding and drought. Their value lies in their multifunctionality – green and blue spaces offer a host of ecological and climate benefits, the most relevant of which are described below.   4.1.1.1. Heat Management    Green and blue spaces are an effective tool for heat management, as they can produce local cooling effects that help areas better cope with high temperatures and heatwaves. This is potentially most useful in cities, prone to a phenomenon known as the ‘urban heat island effect’, a thermal anomaly verified in all types of urban areas, in which much higher temperatures can be experienced compared to surrounding rural areas. This is largely caused by the way cities are built: the physical properties of construction materials, like concrete and asphalt, absorb and retain more heat than natural surfaces like vegetation. Other factors include the density of the built environment, the tallness of buildings, reduced wind speed across the city, urban transport exhaust and air conditioning units that release heat into the street.   However, increasing vegetation and green spaces can cool surrounding areas and limit local heat stress, by reducing solar radiation through shading and by lowering surrounding temperature via heat absorption and the release of water vapour through leaves (transpiration) and from the soil (evaporation). While the highest cooling effect (both in terms of spatial extent and intensity) for green spaces applies to large urban parks, this effect is also produced by smaller vegetated areas, such as green roofs, ground cover, and street trees.   Blue spaces, such as rivers, lakes and reservoirs, can also mitigate thermal stress; a 10% increase in water-body coverage can reduce the urban heat island effect by up to 11%, with the cooling effect extending up to 100 metres beyond the edge of the water. Blue elements, like fountains, equally offer localised cooling effects, as the contact surface between water and air stimulates evaporation, decreasing surrounding temperature. This cooling effect by evaporation also occurs when water spray is in contact with the skin, decreasing overall body temperature.   As Europe is currently the fastest warming continent on Earth, with extreme heat becoming increasingly common (particularly in southern and western Europe), the increase of green and blue spaces offers a practical and effective means of adapting cities to intensifying climate pressures.   4.1.1.2. Improved Indoor and Outdoor Air Quality   The loss, or lack of green and blue spaces has direct and detrimental impacts on air quality, as natural elements help absorb pollutants and carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.  Green spaces contribute to improved air quality and reduced greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations by capturing and storing carbon, mostly in the soil, with smaller amounts in trees and plants. How much carbon is stored by a green space depends on factors like tree age, light levels, and carbon present in the air, with younger trees demonstrating a tendency to absorb higher amounts.  Plants also improve air quality by filtering pollutants, absorbing gases, catching particles in their leaves and breaking down organic compounds in their tissues and or in the soil. Vegetation can also indirectly reduce air pollution by lowering surface temperatures and providing shade, thereby reducing the formation of pollutants by acting as a ‘ground-level ozone’. Research has shown that even putting plants in street canyons can improve air quality, cutting nitrogen dioxide by up to 40% and PM10 by 60% at street level.  These benefits can also apply to indoor air quality, where green elements like house plants and green walls function as natural air filters, absorbing pollutants and increasing oxygen levels.   Blue spaces can also improve air quality by diluting and diffusing pollutants: increasing water surface coverage has been shown to reduce pollutant concentrations in surrounding air, with free-flowing water, such as rivers and streams, shown to be particularly effective. Bodies of water equally help regulate temperature and humidity, which can help reduce the concentration of pollutants.   Indirectly, trees and other forms of vegetation further support increased air quality by shading and cooling buildings and reducing urban heat. This, in turn, lowers cooling energy demand, which, in areas served by gas-fired power plants or motors, reduces air pollution derived from combustion (though not necessarily at the same location).   In Europe, projected increases in wildfires, rising temperatures, and worsening air quality, (especially in Southern regions,) are expected to exacerbate respiratory illness, morbidity, and mortality rates. As such, expanding green and blue spaces presents an effective, low-energy strategy for improving air quality and building resilience to climate-related health risks.  4.1.1.3. Improved water quality   Green (or blue and green) infrastructure can also support improvements in water quality and avoid deterioration of water quality following extreme weather events.   Green infrastructure can capture and store rainwater where it falls, helping to prevent flooding and reduce pollution by keeping contaminated sediments in place. This supports the development of so-called ‘sponge cities’. For example, green roofs can reduce annual stormwater runoff by between 50% and 100%, depending on factors including the type of system used, substrate depth and composition, roof slope, plant species, existing moisture levels, rainfall intensity and duration, and how long it’s been dry before the rain. Green roofs have shown to be particularly effective in reducing the impacts of storms when implemented at scale. By slowing and reducing runoff, green infrastructure can ease pressure on water systems and wastewater treatment facilities, helping to prevent overload and thus avoiding contamination of water sources.   Plants and substrates also help improve the quality of water runoff by absorbing and filtering pollutants, heavy metals, and neutralising acid in rainwater to stabilise pH. In areas located near agricultural territory, green ‘buffer zones’, like vegetated ditches, can also prevent pesticide contamination of waterways by intercepting airborne pesticides, acting as barriers that capture droplets and particles carried by the wind before they reach watercourses.   Water quality in Europe faces growing threats from droughts, extreme weather, pollution and increasing scarcity. Green infrastructure can thus offer a valuable means of adapting to the potential negative impacts of climate change on water systems and protecting water quality.    4.1.1.4. Flood mitigation   A broad range of green and blue infrastructure interventions can effectively reduce flood risk and mitigate the impacts of flooding by storing and slowing surface runoff. These measures can enhance natural processes of water retention, infiltration, and drainage, reducing the volume and speed at which water enters the sewer system.   Increasing overall vegetation cover, and measures such as installing sustainable drainage systems (SUDS), constructing infiltration trenches, restoring urban wetlands, and re-naturalising river channels, can all help to absorb rainfall where it lands, but equally to retain water within the local landscape for longer, thereby reducing flow rates and lowering the likelihood of drainage networks becoming overwhelmed during heavy or prolonged rain events.  With climate change, flood risks are rising across Europe due to more frequent heavy rainfall, especially in northern and Alpine regions, as well as increased river flooding in the west and centre, and accelerating sea-level rise along coasts. Consequently, increasing green and blue spaces in urban areas is increasingly recognised as a valuable approach for stormwater management and flood mitigation, offering a more natural alternative to conventional grey adaptation measures.   4.1.1.5. Biodiversity support   Blue and green spaces are also highly capable of providing support for urban biodiversity.   Blue and green spaces are key for supporting wildlife survival in urban and developed environments. All forms of green and blue infrastructure can support biodiversity, especially when larger areas like parks are connected through features such as rivers, hedgerows, footpaths, street trees, and roadside verges. However, the benefits depend on thoughtful design and management, such as shifting from intensively mown and maintained green spaces toward more naturalistic planting.  Sustainable drainage systems (SUDS) are a strong example of how urban spaces can integrate diverse habitats in support of biodiversity: well-designed SUDS can integrate grasslands, wildflowers, trees, shrubs, ponds, and wetlands, offering habitat and foraging grounds for birds, bats, invertebrates, amphibians, fish, and mammals. For instance, research has shown that SUDS ponds can support up to 80% of the species richness of natural ponds. SUDS can also act as wildlife corridors, providing a safe and sheltered route for both aquatic and terrestrial species across urban landscapes.   Urban areas, in particular, have untapped potential to support biodiversity. Monoculture agriculture often makes farmland less botanically diverse than cities. Urban habitats can therefore help protect rare and native species while also hosting non-native ones, both of which provide ecosystem services and help protect biodiversity. As evidence, research shows that greener cities host a higher number of bee species than conventional farmland.   Green roofs and walls can also play an important role, especially in supporting invertebrates and birds. Biodiverse roofs often include varied slopes and features like logs or stones (“brown roof features”) that shelter spiders, beetles, and resting birds.   Climate change is playing an increasingly important role in the decline of biodiversity, altering marine, terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems around the globe, and driving losses of local species, increased diseases, and mass mortality of plants and animals. As key elements of life on Earth, such as food, water, medicine, and economic activities, are highly dependent on biodiversity, increasing blue and green spaces is key to supporting overall climate resilience and preventing further loss of biodiversity. To this end, the EU’s 2030 Biodiversity Strategy specifically promotes the integration of healthy ecosystems, green infrastructure, and nature-based solutions into urban planning, public spaces, and buildings.
  4.1.1.6. Health and wellbeing
 Green and blue spaces are widely recognised for their capacity to offer considerable health and wellbeing benefits – living near, spending recreational time in, or feeling psychologically connected to nature are consistently associated with improved mental health outcomes.   These benefits are thought to arise through mechanisms such as increased social interaction, cognitive restoration, reduced stress, and psychological recovery. Research has shown that densely urbanised areas with limited access to green and blue spaces are linked to higher risks of psychosis and depression in both women and men. Greener cities have been associated with long-term improvements in mental health, highlighting the potential of urban greening policies to deliver sustained public health gains, and blue spaces are also increasingly recognised for their wellbeing benefits, with both visual exposure and physical visits shown to positively influence mental health. Nature connectedness more broadly is positively associated with wellbeing and negatively associated with psychological distress – visiting green and blue spaces has even been linked to a reduced likelihood of using medication for depression.  Green and blue spaces can equally contribute to a more tranquil environment by buffering noise – plants are particularly efficient at doing so, and research shows that green walls and green roofs exhibit strong potential for sound insulation of buildings. Chronic or sudden exposure to noise, particularly from traffic, can adversely impact the central nervous system, increasing the susceptibility to mental health conditions such as depression, anxiety, suicide, and increasing the risks of cardiological problems and stroke, impaired cognitive performance and even behavioural problems in both children and adolescents. Implementing green and blue infrastructure to reduce and distance noise can therefore meaningfully improve mental and emotional wellbeing, both indoors and outdoors.   Furthermore, the cleaner air, reduced traffic, and open areas typically found in, and around green and blue spaces also provide opportunities for outdoor recreation and physical activity, both of which are strongly linked to improved health and wellbeing and reduced rates of depression.   The health benefits of increased contact with diverse ecosystems and natural green and blue spaces may even extend to long-term effects associated with human exposure to greater microbial diversity. For example, research shows that the risk of developing asthma is lower in children living on traditional farmland, an environment rich in microbial variety – it is thus hypothesised that similar health benefits may arise from exposure to microbial diversity found in well-maintained green and blue spaces.
 In general, green and blue spaces can provide opportunities for recreation, learning, and interaction with nature, as well as nurturing a sense of place and aesthetic value, all of which can decisively contribute to better health and wellbeing. As climate change is projected to worsen physical and mental outcomes worldwide – due to heat stress, air pollution, increased infectious disease risk, pressure on health systems, and by extreme weather events causing PTSD, anxiety, and depression – particularly among vulnerable individuals and communities, increasing green and blue spaces represents a meaningful and effective strategy to mitigate the growing burden on physical health, mental health and overall wellbeing. 
 4.1.1.7. Energy conservation (see 4.2. Building standards and regulations, and 4.3. Retrofitting and Insulation)  Given the myriad potential benefits offered by green and blue spaces, their development and expansion are increasingly viewed as a fundamental pillar of climate-resilient infrastructure planning. Specifically, “Urban Green and Blue Infrastructure planning” (UGI) refers to a strategic approach that seeks to establish interconnected and multifunctional networks of green and blue areas, capable of enhancing the climate resilience of cities, and potentially providing a wide range of environmental, social and economic benefits.   This provision of social and economic benefits is in line with an approach to increasing blue and green spaces that frequently intersects with that of nature-based solutions (NBS), which the European Commission defines as ‘solutions that are inspired and supported by nature which are cost-effective, simultaneously provide environmental, social and economic benefits and help build resilience’. While debate persists within academic and policy circles around the precise boundaries of what constitutes a NBS, (and even more so, evidence-based, successful NBS), the term is widely understood as a broad umbrella concept for a variety of ecosystem-based measures, designed to increase climate resilience while equally delivering co-benefits for society.   Consequently, the enhancement of blue and green spaces often falls within the scope of NBS-related policy, as seen in frameworks such as the EU Biodiversity Strategy for 2030, which calls for the systematic integration of green (and blue) infrastructure and nature-based solutions into urban planning, including public spaces, infrastructure and building design.   Nevertheless, it is important to distinguish that not every increase in blue or green infrastructure qualifies as a NBS.  The latter is typically conceived with a clear intent to address a combination of environmental and societal challenges, with a focus on ecosystem-based adaptation, restoring or mimicking natural processes and nurturing ecological connectivity. While many green and blue interventions do align with this, others may be more isolated, or purely aesthetic and recreational in function.   For example, a city park planted with native species that provides cooling benefits and supports pollinator habitats can be considered a NBS, whereas a stretch of ornamental lawn, though green, may offer limited ecological value and therefore would not meet NBS criteria. Similarly, the ‘daylighting’ and restoration of urban streams can protect against flood risks while supporting local biodiversity, exemplifying a clear NBS, whereas a decorative water feature, while classified as blue space, does not necessarily mitigate climate issues and would not be considered such. 

Ultimately, unless blue and green spaces are conceived in line with NBS principles, their contributions, while still valid, are likely to be limited to aesthetic or recreational purposes.   4.1.2. Adaptation Measures

- Daylighting urban streams: Restoration efforts to bring back fully canalized streams to the surface and to restore their stream bed - Installing water fountains - Creating ponds: Urban ponds can improve resilience by buffering stormwater runoff and serving as refuges for biodiversity  - Developing parks - Street trees: Trees can reduce surface temperatures by up to 19°C through shade and evapotranspiration, and overall temperatures by up to 5-7°C . - Small vegetation patches on pavements Grass has been shown to reduce maximum surface temperatures by up to 24°C, and even fragmented green cover can contribute to temperature regulation and improved air quality.  - Green strips along cycle lanes - Green footpaths - Green roofs and walls - Restoring greenery in underutilized built areas: See Greek National Adaptation Strategy, 4.12. Structured Environment.  
- Urban lake restoration  - Installing green and blue pervious surfaces  - Infiltration basins: Shallow artificial ponds designed to infiltrate stormwater through permeable soils into a groundwater aquifer  - Green trenches - Raingardens - Urban River restoration - Riparian green buffers/woodland creation; This measure involves the establishment of vegetation adjacent to urban streams and rivers, normally consisting of grass, shrubs, and trees. - Blue roofs   4.1.3. Co-benefit of reduced exposure to floodwater

A broad range of green and blue infrastructure interventions can effectively reduce flood risk and mitigate the impacts of flooding by storing and slowing surface runoff. These measures do so by enhancing natural processes of water retention, infiltration, and drainage, reducing the volume and speed at which water enters sewer system, (see 4.1.1. 4. for details).   In doing so, these green and blue interventions may lessen the severity of flooding, and in turn, the risk of exposure to floodwater, thus offering a critical co-benefit for infectious disease risk.   Floodwaters are often contaminated, containing pathogens from sources such as surface run-off, sewer overflows, and even animal waste. These pathogens raise the risk of outbreaks of waterborne diseases through direct or indirect contact with contaminated water following flood events. Accordingly, increasing green and blue spaces in ways that help mitigate pluvial and fluvial flooding, retain water, and prevent sewer overflows equally serve to reduce exposure to infectious pathogens, and thus limit the risk of waterborne illnesses.   In mitigating flooding risk, these green and blue measures can also help prevent contamination of water supplies, supporting continued access to clean water for hygiene and public health, both critical components in reducing vulnerability and preventing the spread of infectious waterborne diseases.  Beyond waterborne diseases, floodwaters can also elevate the risk of vector-borne diseases; vast areas of standing or stagnant water following flooding can create ideal breeding conditions for mosquitoes, thus increasing the risk of mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria, dengue fever, and West Nile virus. By reducing exposure to floodwater, green and blue flood protection infrastructure can also limit the formation of these habitats, and thus reduce the risk of mosquito-borne infections.
 4.1.4. Co-benefit of heat management

Green and blue spaces can contribute to heat management in urban environments, producing localised cooling effects that help mitigate extreme temperatures, lessening the severity of heatwaves in cities and reducing the public health impacts of excessive heat (see 4.1.1.1 for details). By decreasing the urban heat island effect, these spaces can lower the incidence of heat-related illnesses, including heat exhaustion, heatstroke, and dehydration, while also alleviating indirect detrimental impacts of heat on mental health, and cardiovascular and respiratory systems. In worsening these illnesses, heat renders individuals more susceptible to infections, increasing overall vulnerability to infectious diseases – heat-related illnesses are equally associated with an increase in mortality, thus reducing overall public health resilience. Consequently, by mitigating extreme temperatures, green and blue spaces can directly reduce the incidence of heat-related illnesses and thus vulnerability to infectious disease, and indirectly help preserve healthcare system capacity, ensuring better responsiveness during infectious disease outbreaks, as fewer resources are diverted to treat preventable, heat-aggravated issues.  The cooling effects of green and blue infrastructure also reduce the broader infectious disease risks associated with higher temperatures: heat acts as a catalyst for the transmission of several infectious diseases and is particularly capable of accelerating the expansion of vector-borne diseases. Many species of mosquito, for example, responsible for transmitting dengue, chikungunya, malaria, yellow fever and West Nile virus thrive in warmer conditions. Dengue-transmitting species, for instance, have been shown to accelerate their larval development, biting frequency, and viral replication at higher temperatures (a factor that also enables the expansion of their geographic range into higher altitudes and previously cooler regions).   Additionally, increasing green and blue spaces contribute to greater vegetation cover – an equally important factor in mitigating the urban heat island effect on infectious disease hazards. Research indicates that urban areas with low vegetation cover and heat-retaining surfaces, (such as dark roofs and concrete roads), are associated with significantly higher dengue incidence, whereas those with high vegetation cover have been shown to experience approximately 95% lower dengue incidence rates, where land surface temperature averaged 29°C.   Beyond vector-borne risks, extreme heat can also compromise food safety. High air temperatures can adversely affect food quality during transport, storage and handling, particularly if heatwaves cause power outages or disruption of electrical, refrigeration and cooking systems; these factors can increase the likelihood of food-borne illnesses, particularly during summer months. Helping to cool urban environments with green and blue infrastructure may thus indirectly reduce the risk of such outbreaks.  Finally, extreme heat also affects health indirectly by contributing to poor air quality and limiting people's ability to work or exercise outdoors. Reduced physical activity and prolonged indoor confinement can negatively impact overall health, weakening individual resilience to infectious diseases. By mitigating extreme heat, green and blue spaces can help preserve air quality and support opportunities for outdoor work and physical activity, thereby contributing to better health and stronger resistance to infectious disease.
 Ultimately, increasing the presence of green and blue spaces in urban areas has the potential to reduce both the drivers and consequences of infectious disease risk. By alleviating heat stress, these spaces may not only limit the environmental conditions that facilitate disease transmission but also reduce competing demands on healthcare services, maintaining their ability to respond effectively to infectious threats. In this way, the heat management potential of green and blue infrastructure offers benefits for addressing the intersecting infectious disease risks intensified by rising and extreme temperatures.  
 
4.1.5. Co-benefit of improved indoor & outdoor air quality  Green and blue spaces can improve both outdoor and indoor air quality and reduce greenhouse gas concentrations, offering additional benefits for reducing infectious disease risk. Vegetation improves air quality by filtering pollutants, absorbing harmful gases, and lowering surface temperatures, which can reduce the formation and persistence of air pollutants, (as well as cooling demand and the resulting emissions from energy use). Indoor green elements equally work to function as natural air filters, absorbing pollutants and increasing oxygen levels. Blue spaces too, particularly those with moving water, help dilute and disperse airborne contaminants, (see 4.1.1.2. for details).    This is important, as air pollution and exposure to ground-level ozone increase the risk of strokes, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, lung cancer, cardiovascular disease and lower respiratory infections. The interaction between air pollution and extreme heat is particularly harmful to those with pre-existing conditions. These conditions weaken overall resilience, increasing individual vulnerability to infectious diseases; cardiovascular and respiratory illnesses, for example, are known biological risk factors for vulnerability to vector-borne infections.   Conversely, improvements in air quality can alleviate respiratory and cardiovascular stress, helping to reduce the prevalence and severity of these conditions and thereby lowering human vulnerability to infectious disease. Cleaner air can also lower the transmission rates of respiratory infections, both by decreasing the concentration of airbone particulates that act as carriers for pathogens, and by improving overall respiratory health and immune response. Finally, cleaner air can offer opportunities for outdoor physical exercise and recreation, which are positively associated with improved immune function, and in turn, improved resilience to infectious diseases. By improving air quality, green and blue spaces can thus contribute to reducing both the spread and severity of respiratory viruses, and broader vulnerability to infectious disease.  
4.1.6. Co-benefit of enhanced mental health & physical activity 
Green and blue spaces play a vital role in supporting mental and physical health and promoting physical activity, both of which are key to strengthening resilience against infectious diseases. Access to green and blue spaces and natural environments is consistently linked to reduced stress, anxiety, and depression; these spaces can also buffer environmental stressors like noise and pollution, further enhancing psychological, physical, and respiratory health. Increasing green and blue spaces can equally encourage outdoor activities, and regular physical exercise, which is associated with improved immune response, mental health and cardiovascular function, among other benefits, (see 4.1.1.6. for details).    The varied physical and mental health benefits offered by green and blue spaces are closely linked to stronger immune function, which ultimately reduces individual vulnerability to infectious disease. Sudden or chronic stress and mental health conditions can impair immune function, reducing the body’s ability to combat pathogens and potentially leading to more severe disease outcomes; chronic illnesses such as cardiovascular and respiratory diseases also compromise immune resilience.   Consequently, increasing green and blue spaces can play a meaningful role in improving mental and physical health, and, in turn, lowering both individual and collective vulnerability to infectious disease risks.   4.1.7. Co-benefit of healthy ecosystems  Certain increases in green and blue spaces, particularly those that successfully employ a NBS approach, such as urban wetland restoration, can offer the added co-benefit of supporting infectious disease resilience by enhancing biodiversity and contributing to the health and stability of ecosystems.    NBS, in particular, have the potential to improve and restore biodiversity and ecological balance (see 4.1.1.5. for details), both of which are associated with greater resilience to infectious disease. In degraded ecosystems and areas of weakened genetic and species diversity, the complexity and heterogeneity of the natural system are compromised, which makes it more vulnerable and at a heightened risk of creating new opportunities for disease emergence. Notably, the risk of infectious zoonotic diseases is often linked to the degradation or destruction of ecosystems. Consequently, increasing green and blue spaces in ways that preserve and strengthen ecosystem health can help limit the presence and spread of disease vectors, thereby reducing the risk of infectious disease. Constructed wetlands, for example, have been shown to help mitigate antimicrobial resistance (AMR) – a serious threat to public health as it can render standard treatments for infectious diseases ineffective – by limiting the dispersal of pathogens and antibiotic-resistant bacteria in riverine systems.  When it comes to urban green and blue infrastructure planning, expanding these spaces using a ‘greenway’ approach can be particularly effective for supporting biodiversity. This approach conceptualizes parks, green roofs, street trees, and other green and blue spaces as a cohesive network, aiming to maximize nature conservation by creating and preserving ecological corridors for flora and fauna. These corridors maximise biodiversity protection and support by offering refuge and mobility, thereby strengthening ecosystem health and, in turn, reducing the risk of infectious diseases. Even modest increases in green and blue spaces, such as planting green strips or occasional trees along pavements, can enhance a city’s overall connectivity, thereby supporting ecosystem health. These small-scale interventions are particularly beneficial for critically important pollinator species, which rely on connected habitats to thrive and contribute to urban biodiversity.
 Beyond augmenting and restoring ecosystem health, certain green and blue interventions can also help shield natural ecosystems from the damaging effects of extreme weather events. Flood events, for example, can severely damage natural ecosystems and hamper their ability to deliver ecosystem services; by reducing the impact of flooding, green and blue infrastructure can help preserve ecosystem integrity and function. Additionally, constructed wetlands, for example, collect and store rainwater during wetter periods, helping to maintain soil moisture and groundwater levels during droughts; this not only mitigates the impacts of water scarcity but also protects biodiversity by sustaining critical habitats. By shielding ecosystems from the effects of extreme weather events, such green and blue interventions preserve and bolster ecosystem health, which, in turn, can help maintain resilience to infectious diseases.  4.1.8. Co-benefit of safe and clean water resources

Green and blue infrastructure can support improvements in water quality and help prevent deterioration of water quality following extreme weather events, thereby contributing to continuous availability of safe and clean water resources. For example,  green roofs can capture and store rainwater where it falls, slowing stormwater runoff and reducing pressure on water systems, helping to prevent overload and avoiding contamination of water sources, wetlands can help preserve groundwater levels during drought, and increased vegetation can filter and improve the quality of runoff, (see 4.1.1.3. for further details).  In helping to maintain safe and clean water resources, green and blue infrastructure interventions offer potential benefits for reducing infectious disease risk, as they prevent human exposure to contaminated water. Contaminated water, whether floodwater, polluted runoff, or inadequately treated water, often contains pathogens that increase the risk of waterborne disease outbreaks through direct or indirect contact. Sustaining the availability of safe and clean water for essential hygiene and public health can help prevent such outbreaks – in doing so, green and blue interventions can thus help reduce exposure to infectious waterborne diseases.  
 
4.1.9. Trade-off of creating habitat for disease pathogens & vectors 
Increasing green and blue spaces poses a significant trade-off for infectious disease risk by potentially creating habitats for disease pathogens and vectors.    While green and blue spaces can contribute to healthy ecosystems in ways that support overall resilience to infectious disease emergence (see 4.1.7.), in doing so they may provide comfortable habitats, not simply for humans, but also for disease pathogens and vectors. For instance, rich and varied urban soils can serve as ideal environments for a wide array of invertebrates, such as termites, flies, and ticks; these invertebrates play important roles in pathogen control and soil enhancement but can also become vectors of multiple diseases, hosting pathogens harmful to human health, including norovirus, bacterial anthrax, parasitic diseases like ascariasis, and various fungal infections.   Green and blue spaces can support and enhance biodiversity, yet this benefit may also increase the abundance of zoonotic disease carriers. Larger, more diverse invertebrate populations can attract insectivorous bats or rodents, both of which may act as direct vectors or serve as hosts for disease-carrying mites and fleas. European bats, for example, have been identified as potential vectors of paramyxoviruses, which are linked to measles, mumps, and respiratory tract infections. Without appropriate preventative measures, this could heighten the risk of zoonotic viruses transferring to nearby human populations. Improved biodiversity has also been associated with increased opportunities for the transmission of tick-borne Lyme disease.  
Additionally, blue spaces and poorly designed or maintained green infrastructure, such as improperly irrigated parks, green roofs in areas with limited air circulation and blocked drainage systems, or stagnant ornamental water features, can lead to standing water, creating ideal breeding conditions for mosquitoes. This, in turn, directly increases the risk of mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria, dengue fever, and West Nile virus.  Similarly, certain nature-based solutions for flood mitigation, such as constructed urban wetlands and riparian buffers adjacent to waterways, equally risk supporting mosquito breeding grounds, particularly if not designed from the outset with mosquito management practices in place. Designing water features with steep sides, for example, can reduce mosquito breeding potential, but without such measures, these green and blue spaces may inadvertently increase disease hazards by contributing to outbreaks of mosquito-borne diseases.   Blue spaces, if poorly managed, can also elevate the risk of waterborne diseases. For instance, urban water bodies used for recreation may become contaminated, due to inadequate wastewater treatment, pathogens introduced by humans or pets, microplastics that promote biofilm formation, or stormwater runoff carrying pollutants – these factors can favour the proliferation of pathogenic microbes, thus raising human exposure to waterborne pathogens. In particular, urban wetlands, if not well-maintained can overflow, leading to direct contact with untreated wastewater. 
 Furthermore, increasing green and blue spaces may elevate contact between humans and wildlife, such as birds. This interaction can raise the risk of zoonotic disease transmission, particularly from migratory birds carrying high pathogen loads, or urban-adapted, ‘friendly’ species like sparrows, crows and pigeons, where they are relevant vectors of disease. 
 Finally, while green and blue spaces are often credited with lowering temperatures, they can also increase humidity. Higher humidity can extend the lifespan of mosquitoes, thereby lengthening the transmission window for certain mosquito-borne diseases. Research shows that increasing green and blue infrastructure from 0 to 20 meters can reduce average temperatures by 2.5–4.8 °C, but also raise humidity by approximately 0.5–3.5 g/kg. In fact, when green and blue spaces reach a certain size, the same study claims that its cooling benefits may be counteracted by the higher total humidity levels,  creating a microclimate that could favour mosquito proliferation. Legionnaires disease has equally shown to be correlated with high levels of humidity, as are Lyme borreliosis and tick-borne encephalitis, both associated with humid summers.   Consequently, while expanding green and blue spaces can provide numerous ecological and health benefits, doing so without awareness of associated trade-offs for disease risks, and in the absence of appropriate management and design, can significantly increase the likelihood of creating habitats conducive to disease pathogens and vectors. 
4.1.10. Trade-off of allergies & respiratory issues  While increasing green and blue spaces can enhance air quality and is largely associated with positive improvements for respiratory health, especially lower respiratory mortality, these spaces may also introduce and increase the presence of pollen and other aeroallergens (such as fungal spores, animal dander and insect feces) near human populations, exacerbating asthma, allergic disease, and respiratory infections in susceptible individuals.   Such allergies and respiratory conditions can increase individual vulnerability to infectious diseases. Pollen exposure, in fact, is a recognised risk factor for both the incidence and severity of respiratory viral infections. Allergic reactions can trigger airway irritation and inflammation of the respiratory tract, which may impair immunity of the mucosal system, reduce airway clearance, and compromise lung function, ultimately creating conditions that can facilitate bacterial or viral colonisation. Elevated systemic and local inflammation associated with allergic responses can further weaken the body’s ability to mount effective immune defences. In asthma, for example, underlying inflammation has been shown to impair antiviral immune responses, which would increase susceptibility to infections. 
 Additionally, if not carefully designed, green infrastructure can have limited, or even negative, impacts on air quality. For example, while strategically placed vegetation can help disperse pollutants, dense tree-planting in shallow urban canyons may actually increase concentrations of pollutants, such as carbon monoxide, by restricting airflow and reducing ventilation efficiency. In urban areas, certain species of tree have been shown to actually emit, rather than absorb, biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOCs) that can act as a precursor to smog or ozone formation, particularly if climatic conditions are conducive.  In particular, with regard to blue spaces, the inhalation of water vapour can pose serious risks of respiratory disease if the vapour contains contaminants. Vapour or mist from fountains, jets, and other water features, while providing pleasant cooling effects in summer, can transmit illnesses through the inhalation of Legionella bacteria present in the water. Legionella infections may cause flu-like symptoms (Pontiac fever) and, in many reported cases, a form of pneumonia (legionellosis) with potentially fatal complications, particularly among vulnerable, elderly, and immunocompromised individuals.   Legionella bacteria multiply in warm water, especially at temperatures between 20°C and 45°C, and tend to colonise and grow within biofilms in stagnant water. Blue elements and ornamental water installations are therefore particularly susceptible to fuelling Legionella growth during periods of high summer temperatures. Inhalation of contaminated water vapour may also expose individuals to amoebae and enteroviruses capable of causing gastrointestinal infections, as well as adenoviruses and mycobacteria, which can cause respiratory infections.   Harmful algal blooms (HABs) present another significant health risk, arising from the mass proliferation of phytoplankton in open waterbodies, a phenomenon exacerbated by pollution, water scarcity and stagnation, and higher temperatures, among other factors. These blooms can release toxins that cause mild to severe illnesses in humans, whether inhaled through water vapour or ingested while swimming (or consumed in contaminated seafood).   Consequently, increasing green and blue spaces therefore poses the trade-off for infectious disease risk of potentially exacerbating allergies and respiratory issues, and fueling respiratory illnesses, especially in sensitive populations. This risk may be heightened by climate change, which is expected to increase temperatures and periods of extreme heat, but also to lengthen pollen seasons, increase pollen loads, and enhance allergenicity, thereby intensifying health impacts in already vulnerable groups. 
 
4.1.11. Mitigation Potential   Increasing green and blue spaces can also serve as a powerful tool for climate mitigation; these spaces reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations by capturing and storing carbon, mostly in the soil, with smaller amounts in trees and plants. (The amount of carbon stored depends on factors like tree age, light availability, and carbon present in the air, with younger trees demonstrating a tendency to absorb higher amounts). Consequently, by expanding vegetated and water-based surfaces, urban (and non-urban) areas can increase carbon sequestration and help lower atmospheric GHG concentrations.  
 This is critically important, as climate change is primarily caused by the accumulation of greenhouse gases, such as carbon dioxide and methane, in the atmosphere, which trap heat and disrupt global climate systems. Absorbing these gases slows the pace of global warming, helping to prevent the most severe impacts on ecosystems, human health, and economies. Therefore, decreasing greenhouse gas concentrations – whether directly through reductions, or indirectly through absorption – is the fundamental strategy for mitigating climate change.   Expanding urban green and blue spaces can thus be a potent mitigation lever, provided they are well-designed and maintained. For example, research shows that the carbon sink capacity of green spaces can be improved by optimising their morphology, reducing human interference, and increasing landscape richness; this is because higher biodiversity allows more ecological niches to be occupied, creating higher plant productivity. Conversely, creating smaller, disconnected, or excessively fragmented green spaces may reduce their carbon sink capacity. A study also evidences that suboptimal plant density can decrease plant growth and carbon sink capacity. 
 Maintenance equally matters for green and blue spaces mitigation potential: life-cycle analyses of urban parks find that while vegetation and soils absorb CO₂, energy use, chemicals and labour input for maintenance practices, such as irrigation systems and fertiliser, will release carbon back into the atmosphere, reducing their total GHG reduction. For example, studies have evidenced that lawns can often be a carbon source, rather than a carbon sink. 
 Finally, and most concerningly, wildfires in large-scale green and blue spaces can potentially flip these areas from reliable carbon sinks to net carbon emitters, undermining carbon offset schemes and completely counteracting their climate mitigation activity. 

Nevertheless, when well-designed and unthreatened, green and blue spaces that absorb greenhouse gases offer an effective, nature-based approach to climate change mitigation.

References
1. https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/adaptation-options/green-spaces-and-corridors-in-urban-areas ; Smith, A. and Chausson. A. (2021) Nature-based Solutions in UK Climate Adaptation Policy. A report prepared by the Nature-based Solutions Initiative at the University of Oxford for WWF-UK and RSPB.
2. https://unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/green-and-blue-spaces.pdf ; https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52020DC0380
3. https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/adaptation-options/green-spaces-and-corridors-in-urban-areas
4. https://unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/green-and-blue-spaces.pdf p. 3
5. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132322006084 ; https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/earth-and-planetary-sciences/evapotranspiration
6. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965262031458X
7. Mccormick, K. (Ed.) (2020). Cities, Nature and Innovation: New Directions. Lund University; https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/adaptation-options/water-uses-to-cope-with-heat-waves-in-cities
8. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 206.
9. Jo, H.-K. and G.E. McPherson, Carbon storage and flux in urban residential greenspace. Journal of Environmental Management, 1995. 45(2): p. 109-133 ; Getter, K.L., et al., Carbon sequestration potential of extensive green roofs. Environmental science & technology, 2009. 43(19): p. 7564-7570.
10. Raskin, I., R.D. Smith, and D.E. Salt, Phytoremediation of metals: using plants to remove pollutants from the environment. Current opinion in biotechnology, 1997. 8(2): p. 221-226. ; Tomson, M., et al., Green infrastructure for air quality improvement in street canyons. Environment international, 2021. 146: p. 106288.
11. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1420326X18783042#:~:text=Several%20studies%20have%20indicated%20that,organic%20compounds%20under%20controlled%20conditions ; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/378802852_Enhancing_Indoor_Air_Quality_with_Portable_Green_Living_Partition
12. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210670719314210 ; https://www.mdpi.com/2073-445X/12/5/964
13. https://elearning.unipd.it/dicea/pluginfile.php/80942/mod_resource/content/0/Abkari_2002.pdf
14. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 149.
15. https://unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/green-and-blue-spaces.pdf p. 9; Liu, H., Y. Jia, and C. Niu, “Sponge city” concept helps solve China’s urban water problems. Environmental Earth Sciences, 2017. 76(14): p. 1-5.
16. Liu, H., Y. Jia, and C. Niu, “Sponge city” concept helps solve China’s urban water problems. Environmental Earth Sciences, 2017. 76(14): p. 1-5.; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866722002679
17. Versini, P.-A., et al., Use of green roofs to solve storm water issues at the basin scale–Study in the Hauts-de-Seine County (France). Urban Water Journal, 2016. 13(4): p. 372-381.
18. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866722002679
19. Liu, H., Y. Jia, and C. Niu, “Sponge city” concept helps solve China’s urban water problems. Environmental Earth Sciences, 2017. 76(14): p. 1-5.; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334011195_The_Impacts_of_Substrate_and_Vegetation_on_Stormwater_Runoff_Quality_from_Extensive_Green_Roofs; https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/14/18/2792
20. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6072638/ ; https://unepccc.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/green-and-blue-spaces.pdf p. 9
21. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union.
22. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/public-health/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2025.1583978/full ; https://www.witpress.com/elibrary/wit-transactions-on-ecology-and-the-environment/184/28342 ; https://iwaponline.com/bgs/article/2/1/28/71140/The-blue-green-path-to-urban-flood-resilience
23. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 102; Petsinaris, F., et al. 2020. Compendium of Nature-based and ‘grey’ solutions to address climate- and water-related problems in European cities. GROWGREEN. Available at: https://growgreenproject.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Compendium-of-NBS-and-grey-solutions.pdf
24. Feyen, L., et al., 2020, Climate change impacts and adaptation in Europe, JRC Publications Repository; Bednar-Friedl, B., et al., 2022, ′Chapter 13′, in: Pörtner, H. O. et al. (eds), Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1817—1927; European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 226.
25. Smith, A. and Chausson. A. (2021) Nature-based Solutions in UK Climate Adaptation Policy. A report prepared by the Nature-based Solutions Initiative at the University of Oxford for WWF-UK and RSPB, p. 48.
26. Krivtsov et al. (2019). Monitoring and modelling SUDS retention ponds: case studies from Scotland. ICONHIC 2019.
27. Whitford, V., A.R. Ennos, and J.F. Handley, “City form and natural process”—indicators for the ecological performance of urban areas and their application to Merseyside, UK. Landscape and urban planning, 2001. 57(2): p. 91-103.
28. Baldock, K.C., et al., Where is the UK's pollinator biodiversity? The importance of urban areas for flower-visiting insects. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 2015. 282(1803): p. 20142849; Baldock, K.C., et al., A systems approach reveals urban pollinator hotspots and conservation opportunities. Nature ecology & evolution, 2019. 3(3): p. 363-373.
29. Smith, A. and Chausson. A. (2021) Nature-based Solutions in UK Climate Adaptation Policy. A report prepared by the Nature-based Solutions Initiative at the University of Oxford for WWF-UK and RSPB, p. 48.
30. https://www.un.org/en/climatechange/science/climate-issues/biodiversity
31. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52020DC0380
32. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87675-0
33. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK597114/
34. Sundquist, K., G. Frank, and J. Sundquist, Urbanisation and incidence of psychosis and depression: follow-up study of 4.4 million women and men in Sweden. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 2004. 184(4): p. 293-298.
35. Alcock, I., et al., Longitudinal effects on mental health of moving to greener and less green urban areas. Environmental science & technology, 2014. 48(2): p. 1247-1255.
36. Hermanski, A., et al., The effects of blue spaces on mental health and associated biomarkers. International Journal of Mental Health, 2022. 51(3): p. 203-217.
37. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87675-0
38. Smith, A. and Chausson. A. (2021) Nature-based Solutions in UK Climate Adaptation Policy. A report prepared by the Nature-based Solutions Initiative at the University of Oxford for WWF-UK and RSPB, p. 8-9.
39. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41370-024-00642-5#:~:text=These%20harms%20of%20noise%20increase,problems%20in%20children%20and%20adolescents; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3971384/
40. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87675-0; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12005518/#:~:text=Studies%20have%20observed%20that%2C%20regardless,depression%20%5B25%E2%80%9327%5D.
41. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21345099/;
42. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21345099/; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969722015406
43. Smith, A. and Chausson. A. (2021) Nature-based Solutions in UK Climate Adaptation Policy. A report prepared by the Nature-based Solutions Initiative at the University of Oxford for WWF-UK and RSPB, p. 17.
44. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 149; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4446935/ ; https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/observatory/evidence/health-effects/mental-health-effects ; Lawrance, D.E., et al. (2021). The impact of climate change on mental health and emotional wellbeing: current evidence and implications for policy and practice. Grantham Institute. Briefing Paper No 36; Romanello, M., et al. (2021) The 2021 report of the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: code red for a healthy future. The Lancet. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01787-6. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/
45. https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/adaptation-options/green-spaces-and-corridors-in-urban-areas
46. European Commission. 2024. European Research Executive Agency, Nature-based solutions – EU-funded NBS research projects tackle the climate and biodiversity crisis, Publications Office of the European Union. Available at: https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/624d1fcf-b83a-11ef-91ed-01aa75ed71a1/language-en
47. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1462901118306671
48. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=celex%3A52020DC0380 Art. 2.2.8.
49. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/ecology-and-evolution/articles/10.3389/fevo.2022.838794/full
50. https://wires.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/wat2.1014
51. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866712000611
52. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866712000611
53. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/253064021_Adapting_Cities_for_Climate_Change_The_Role_of_the_Green_Infrastructure
54. https://engineering.purdue.edu/ecohydrology/Pubs/2012%20WASP%20Ahiablame%20et%20al.pdf
55. https://www.academia.edu/13231767/The_Design_and_Hydraulic_Performance_of_a_Raingarden_for_Control_of_Stormwater_Runoff_in_a_Highly_Urbanised_Area
56. https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/adaptation-options/establishment-and-restoration-of-riparian-buffer-s
57. https://www.nyc.gov/assets/dep/downloads/pdf/water/stormwater/stormwater-design-construction-guidelines-2012-final.pdf
58. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/public-health/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2025.1583978/full ; https://www.witpress.com/elibrary/wit-transactions-on-ecology-and-the-environment/184/28342 ; https://iwaponline.com/bgs/article/2/1/28/71140/The-blue-green-path-to-urban-flood-resilience
59. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 38-39; Weilnhammer, V., et al., 2021, 'Extreme weather events in Europe and their health consequences — A systematic review', International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 233.
60. Kibret, S., 2018, ‘Time to revisit how dams are affecting malaria transmission’, The LancetPlanetary Health 2(9), p. e378-e379.
61. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 39; Weilnhammer, V., et al., 2021, 'Extreme weather events in Europe and their health consequences — A systematic review', International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health 233.
62. https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/adaptation-options/green-spaces-and-corridors-in-urban-areas
63. European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 21; WHO Europe, 2021, Heat and health in the WHO European region: updated evidence for effective prevention, World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. Available at: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/245310872/Heat_and_Health_WHO_UNEP_DTU_2021.pdf
64. European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 21; WHO Europe, 2021, Heat and health in the WHO European region: updated evidence for effective prevention, World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe. Available at: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/245310872/Heat_and_Health_WHO_UNEP_DTU_2021.pdf; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7195085/; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12007019/
65. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935123008824 ; https://www.nature.com/articles/s41558-022-01426-1
66. European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 37.
67. European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 37-40; IPCC WGII, 2022. Sixth assessment report, Working Group II — Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Fact sheet — Europe, climate change impacts and risks, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Available at: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/
68. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1413867014002074
69. EFSA, 2020, Climate change as a driver of emerging risks for food and feed safety, plant, animal health and nutritional quality, European Food Safety Authority. Available at: https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/supporting/pub/en-1881 ; European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union.
70. Ebi, K. L., et al., 2021, ′Hot weather and heat extremes: health risks′, The Lancet 398(10301), pp. 698—708; WHO, 2018, Heat and Healt. Available at: https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-heat-and-health
71. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8056368/
72. Jo, H.-K. and G.E. McPherson, Carbon storage and flux in urban residential greenspace. Journal of Environmental Management, 1995. 45(2): p. 109-133; Getter, K.L., et al., Carbon sequestration potential of extensive green roofs. Environmental science & technology, 2009. 43(19): p. 7564-7570; Raskin, I., R.D. Smith, and D.E. Salt, Phytoremediation of metals: using plants to remove pollutants from the environment. Current opinion in biotechnology, 1997. 8(2): p. 221-226. ; Tomson, M., et al., Green infrastructure for air quality improvement in street canyons. Environment international, 2021. 146: p. 106288.
73. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1420326X18783042#:~:text=Several%20studies%20have%20indicated%20that,organic%20compounds%20under%20controlled%20conditions ; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/378802852_Enhancing_Indoor_Air_Quality_with_Portable_Green_Living_Partition
74. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210670719314210 ; https://www.mdpi.com/2073-445X/12/5/964
75. European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 151.
76. EEA, 2018b, Unequal exposure and unequal impacts: social vulnerability to air pollution, noise and extreme temperatures in Europe, EEA Report No 22/2018, European Environment Agency; EEA, 2022, Advancing towards climate resilience in Europe —Status of reported national adaptation actions in 2021, EEA Report No 11/2022, European Environment Agency.
77. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7908487/; European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 340.
78. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11086747/#:~:text=Modeling%20studies%20and%20observational%20evidence%20show%20that,the%20risk%20of%20transmission%20within%20a%20room.&text=Similarly%2C%20a%20study%20in%20a%20hospital%20found,rate%20of%20air%20samples%20for%20SARS%2DCoV%2D2%20RNA.
79. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8056368/
80. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87675-0
81. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41370-024-00642-5#:~:text=These%20harms%20of%20noise%20increase,problems%20in%20children%20and%20adolescents; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3971384/; Smith, A. and Chausson. A. (2021) Nature-based Solutions in UK Climate Adaptation Policy. A report prepared by the Nature-based Solutions Initiative at the University of Oxford for WWF-UK and RSPB, p. 8-9.
82. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-021-87675-0; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12005518/#:~:text=Studies%20have%20observed%20that%2C%20regardless,depression%20%5B25%E2%80%9327%5D; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8056368/ ; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7908487/
83. Segerstrom, S. C. and Miller, G. E., 2004, ‘Psychological Stress and the Human Immune System: A Meta-Analytic Study of 30 Years of Inquiry’, Psychological bulletin 130(4), pp. 601-630; Godbout, J. P. and Glaser, R., 2006, ‘Stress-Induced Immune Dysregulation: Implications for Wound Healing, Infectious Disease and Cancer’, Journal of Neuroimmune Pharmacology 1(4), pp. 421-427.
84. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7908487/; European Environment Agency, 2024. European climate risk assessment, Publications Office of the European Union, p. 340.
85. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-024-07380-6
86. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241565196
87. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/15/9/7243; FEBA. Nature-Based Solutions in Humanitarian Contexts. 2021. Available at: https://www.iucn.org/sites/dev/files/NbS_in_humanitarian_contexts_key_messages_1.pdf
88. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304389425017716
89. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866724002620
90. https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/12/how-greenways-can-boost-nature-positive-living-by-shaping-urban-mobility/
91. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/272828256_The_Greenway_A_Study_of_Shared_AnimalHuman_Mobility ;
92. https://jipr.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s43065-021-00023-4 ; https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4907/15/4/679 ; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/375379912_Importance_of_urban_green_areas'_connectivity_for_the_conservation_of_pollinators
93. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6404734/
94. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2468584423000363
95. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1618866722002679
96. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2468584423000363
97. Liu, H., Y. Jia, and C. Niu, “Sponge city” concept helps solve China’s urban water problems. Environmental Earth Sciences, 2017. 76(14): p. 1-5.; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/334011195_The_Impacts_of_Substrate_and_Vegetation_on_Stormwater_Runoff_Quality_from_Extensive_Green_Roofs; https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/14/18/2792
98. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union
99. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2772985024000310
100. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4307626/ ; https://www.clinicalmicrobiologyandinfection.com/article/S1198-743X(23)00491-3/fulltext
101. https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0038688
102. World Health Organisation, European Region. 2025. Nature-based solutions and health. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; Fournet F, Simard F, Fontenille D (2024). Green cities and vector-borne diseases: emerging concerns and opportunities. Eurosurveillance. 29(10).
103. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132316304528 ; Kibret, S., 2018, ‘Time to revisit how dams are affecting malaria transmission’, The Lancet Planetary Health 2(9), p. e378-e379; https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387349299_Impact_of_Urban_Landscaping_and_Water_Management_on_Mosquito_Habitats_in_New_Delhi
104. Ibid; https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13157-022-01613-y ; https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/1365-2664.13576 ; https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.3402/iee.v5.30082
105. https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.3402/iee.v5.30082#d1e1064
106. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-018-31706-w ; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969722044199
107. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666634024004471 ; https://www.mdpi.com/2076-0817/14/1/75
108. European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 40.
109. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132325005773; Marini, G., et al., 2020, 'Influence of Temperature on the Life-Cycle Dynamics of Aedes albopictus Population Established at Temperate Latitudes: A Laboratory Experiment', Insects 11(11), p. 808; Benali, A., et al., 2014, 'Satellite-derived estimation of environmental suitability for malaria vector development in Portugal', Remote Sensing of Environment 145, pp. 116-130.
110. European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 67.
111. European Environment Agency, 2022. Climate change as a threat to health and well-being in Europe: focus on heat and infectious diseases. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 37.
112. https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/medicine-and-dentistry/aeroallergen
113. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169204621000335; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0048969722015406; https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10453-020-09671-7#ref-CR40; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169204620314857
114. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36566960/; https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36566960/
115. https://www.thelancet.com/journals/ebiom/article/PIIS2352-3964(23)00158-5/fulltext; https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7008537/#:~:text=Acute%20infectious%20diseases%20have%20essentially,recurrence%20and%20increase%20symptom%20severity.
116. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7008537/#:~:text=Acute%20infectious%20diseases%20have%20essentially,recurrence%20and%20increase%20symptom%20severity.
117. https://www.jacionline.org/article/S0091-6749(14)00667-8/fulltext#:~:text=In%20both%20studies%20cross%2Dlinking,in%20patients%20with%20allergic%20asthma.
118. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264817226_Evaluating_the_role_of_vegetation_on_the_ventilation_performance_in_isolated_deep_street_canyons; https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13280-019-01164-3; https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13280-019-01164-3
119. https://acsess.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.2134/jeq2015.11.0567 ; Calfapietra, C., Fares, S., Manes, F., Morani, A., Sgrigna, G., and Loreto, F.. 2013. Role of biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC) emitted by urban trees on ozone concentration in cities: A review. Environ. Pollut. 183: 71–80.
120. https://www.bluehealth2020-dst.eu/blue-health-backend/report.php?reqtype=opt1&tag=5_II_B
121. https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/AER_for_2017-Legionnaires-disease_1.pdf
122. Ibid; https://www.bluehealth2020-dst.eu/blue-health-backend/report.php?reqtype=opt1&tag=5_II_B
123. https://www.bluehealth2020-dst.eu/blue-health-backend/report.php?reqtype=opt1&tag=5_II_B
124. https://www.cdc.gov/harmful-algal-blooms/about/index.html; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1568988320301803
125. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0169204620314857; European Environment Agency. 2024. Responding to climate change impacts on human health in Europe: focus on floods, droughts and water quality. Publications Office of the European Union, p. 108; https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013935120308094
126. Jo, H.-K. and G.E. McPherson, Carbon storage and flux in urban residential greenspace. Journal of Environmental Management, 1995. 45(2): p. 109-133 ; Getter, K.L., et al., Carbon sequestration potential of extensive green roofs. Environmental science & technology, 2009. 43(19): p. 7564-7570.
127. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_FullReport.pdf
128. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_FullReport.pdf
129. https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/16/5/1870
130. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0195925522000324; https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/sustainable-cities/articles/10.3389/frsc.2024.1452403/full
131. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0195925522000324
132. https://unu.edu/inweh/news/frequent-large-scale-wildfires-are-turning-forests-carbon-sinks-super-emitters
